the myth of the genius of gene sharp
look at this list of revolutionary
suggestions from the white
english-speaking American man who
claimed credit for the success of the
Arab Spring who clicked click on credit
for the amazing success that we see in
Syria today in the year 2020 for the
unbelievable transformation of the
nonviolent transformation of Libya that
you see ongoing today here you go
you're a suggestions number 123 through
132 right there in the middle withdrawal
from government educational institutions
in plain English drop out of the school
what what a great suggestion
Toby's like I'm not gonna read out this
whole list to you
there are fully 198 items in the list
I'll characterize them describe further
but just just looking at this section
the list do you think this would have
prevented the ascent of fascism in Japan
in the years leading up to World War two
if all the people of good conscience
dropped out of school you think that
would have prevented tyranny in Japan
how about um how about indigenous
peoples in North America you know what
let's even take easy examples like the
Navajo Indians who weren't completely
driven off their land weren't completely
driven to extinction through violent
means people but a little bit of a
chance to negotiate with government
authorities far from the most extreme
examples in terms of the history of
genocide around these parts do you think
um do you think dropping out of school
would have been good if I sue them do
you think that would help their people
survive the pressures of genocide and
tyranny from the government United
States America or British Empire before
that no hmm can you think of any
conflict in the world past present or
future in which this is good advice let
alone genius can you think of any
conflict whether it be Syria or Libya
where you know this list of advice could
be could merit calling this man
the Machiavelli behind the Arab Spring
the brains behind the Occupy Wall Street
movement all the other laurels and
praise heaped on gene sharp and to some
extent appropriated by irrigated by gene
sharp in the video I made before this
one I was alluding to gene sharp when I
said there was a rotating cast of
characters in the year 2011 2012 2013
who kept appearing on BBC hard talk and
so on I checked my memory gene sharp was
indeed on the BBC talk show hard talk he
was really precisely and especially the
first thing I was alluding to in that
book wasn't the only one um why was he
so prominent there's money involved guys
like gene sharp survived on donations
given to his foundation so in the same
way that you have a completely cynical
self-serving charity in our times like
extinction rebellion getting out in
front of those headlines and saying we
were the ones responsible for this put
money into our bank accounts now gene
sharp left at the chance to get donation
dollars flowing into his bizarre or
eccentric organization organization that
he called the Albert Einstein foundation
no connection to Albert Einstein
I think that he you like to think of
himself as the Albert Einstein of
non-violent regime-change activism okay
here are numbers 181 to 182 the
obviously this is towards the end of a
list of 198 methods hmm politically
motivated counterfeiting example right
now in Syria would you go over there and
get involved in counterfeiting and then
you know quite likely be hunted down and
imprisoned or killed for counterfeit in
Japan during the rise of fascism the
transition because they did they had a
parliament at a shaky democracy and
things got shaky or at Shaker before you
know what it was more or less definitive
Oh
Joseph Stalin right do you think do you
really believe that counterfeiting you
say is a defensible method of I don't
even know to say this it's not just
civil disobedience he's talking about
regime change a way to challenge
dictatorial or tyrannical regime and
replace it with a democratic one Saudi
Arabia you in the audience I'm talking
about you would you personally risk your
life to engage in counterfeiting inside
your you believe you know what it's
worth it it's worth it to face jail or
the death penalty to be counterfeiting
in the name of democracy in the name of
progress the name of summed up okay
let's look at the other the other items
on this list reverse strike stay in
strike nonviolent land seizure mmm-hmm
yeah not only would I say that's a bad
suggestion for say First Nations people
here in Canada are Native people are
indigenous people um where they are
they're unlikely to be killed I mean the
government can it's not gonna shoot them
dead if they invoke me heard of a little
country named China how do you think
that [ __ ] would go down if you're
opposing the Communist Party the current
you know non democratic governments are
and how do you think that would go down
and say Saudi Arabia what if the land
you tried to seize had valuable oil
assets on it or oh yeah I'm gonna sit
here in my armchair and I'm gonna
publish a book and put it on the
internet and I'm gonna accept donations
you know or recommending to people
engage in a counterfeiting in nonviolent
way and see a non-violent land seizure
soon enough tends to get violent and
again even in the current Canadian
context where the government is
relatively sympathetic towards those
types of disruptions you know they don't
just send in the tanks but but again
Canada already is in democracy so it's
not really what he's tied with it we'd
have to be talking about Libya Syria
China Saudi Arabia right um the rest of
this list is not worth it's not worth
reading out the only things on this list
that aren't ridiculous dangerous and
self-destructive
are the things that aren't worth talking
about because they are such well-worn
familiar canards from every form of
mainstream political activism like you
recommends marching on the streets he
recommends slogans he recommends
spray-painting slogans having a
color-coordinated leaflet in campaign
crap like this
you could have got this out of the
Nabisco marketing campaign it's just you
know there's just nothing special
there's nothing interesting about it and
if you wanna claim this is the key to
success like you know in a really
high-risk situation like Saudi Arabia or
something history is actually quite
lacking and positive examples of that
and you know normally if you go through
the history episode by episode even if
you look at a case study where that was
one part of the the progress that was
made like oh yeah there were some
leaflets there wasn't spray-painting or
so on it's it's normally I can't even
call it the icing on the cake I mean
it's a minor footnote it's a minor
decorative element of major political
changes that were that were ongoing and
that very often did indeed involve a
military intervention and what-have-you
okay now there are two claims being made
in this video let's spell them out one
I'm claiming that gene sharp was a
[ __ ] artist that his actual books
were [ __ ] that his actual advice was
[ __ ] in and of itself and that he
was what you would call an ambulance
chaser somewhat old-fashioned slang now
that he saw this crisis unfolding the
Arab Spring and he tried to chase after
the story get himself into the headlines
get into the newspapers because that
would get more donations for his cause
first foundation that's not evil but
it's dumb and it shouldn't be celebrated
and he shouldn't be given career for
this this is this is one part of it now
when a warning against here has very
clear parallels for activism you know as
diverse as the vegan movement as
feminism and all kinds of things going
on in the world this we have to we have
to watch off this is a thing okay so
that's one part of it the other thing
I'm calling into question or really
ridiculing is the notion that this
[ __ ] career of gene sharp had
anything important to do with the
progress or history of the Arab Spring
itself
okay now again in a world where a
butterfly flapping its wings is
connected to a tornado I can't say there
is absolutely zero significance to the
peculiar career of gene sharp and his
tiny foundation but how significant was
the influence of gene sharp compared to
the significance of the collapse of the
Iraqi regime headed by Saddam Hussein if
you go through the interviews of any of
these guys who stood up an Isetta to
risk their lives in Syria or Libya or
even in Egypt you'll find that one of
the common themes is they were spending
a lot of time watching satellite
television not the internet satellite
television in the Arab world that time
was really the crucial medium and they
watched what they had thought of as an
unassailable strongman regime getting
torn down and destroyed including by the
way the really x-rated pictures of
Saddam himself being humiliated and
tortured and killed I mean that the
actual footage from the very end of
Saddam's life when he's going to drag
through the streets and that gave a lot
of people the idea in Syria in Libya
even in Egypt hey and elsewhere too hey
if Saddam Hussein was not as
invulnerable as he seemed maybe our
local dictatorial strongman government
maybe it also isn't involved with maybe
you know okay that was a huge influence
on the region and let's be honest anyone
would step forward don't say oh yeah but
in Iraq that was only possible because
of the involvement of the American
military and the CIA there were a lot of
people in Syria who expected that if
they started the ball rolling there
would be an active intervention from the
US military and the CIA and there was I
mean on a small scale but it was you'd
have to be deaf dumb and blind to think
Barack Obama did nothing in Syria Terry
Bussieres he did he did a lot but not as
much as the outright full-scale invasion
of Iraq or Afghanistan still mmm there
was a little-known
politician named Hillary Clinton who was
the number one hawk saying that they
should take advantage of the temporary
disorder in Libya to really maximize CIA
black ops and maybe outright military
intervention in Libya so it's not the
case that these people were so naive
that they looked at the Arab Spring and
thought this was a symbol of non-violent
activism no I was idiots
I can't even say I think gene sharp was
completely cynical but idiots who took
this story about gene sharp and it's
poking around with it those people were
trying to manufacture and misrepresent
this as an example of non-violent regime
change I think the the people within the
Arab arabic-speaking world they looked
at the reality of this and said okay
with or without US military support we
can get this started and then very
likely as soon as cracks start to show
in the regime we will get some US
military support we'll get some CIA
support and we can keep the ball rolling
and have a regime change that is
convenient for them in states America
it's probably convenient for Israel it's
probably convenient for a whole bunch of
strange bedfellows across the region you
know in some cases Saudi Arabia in some
cases Iran other people may want to get
involved with watching the cookie
crumble so it's it's not the case that
people within the Arab world were so
soon as the people outside in the
predominantly white English being world
who want to manufacture this method all
right so the final saddening conclusion
we have to stress here gene sharp is now
dead if you google his name you will get
the obituaries all of which I mean
understand what someone's just died
nobody wants to say anything overly
harsh or critical the obituary is
written about the man soon after his
death all just say that he had this
wonderful positive effect on the Arab
Spring this wonderful positive effect on
Syria and Libya there's no statement
that these things were disasters for the
people involved or that there's really
no evidence at all that they were
following a playbook provided by G sharp
this is a myth but the most fundamental
myth being misrepresenting the Arab
Spring as if it was a success rather
than a failure and as if it were
non-violence instead of violent very
strange but I noticed in his obituaries
people had more
given up the attempt at glorifying the
old we are the 99% movement the Occupy
Wall Street movement and back in
2011-2012 that was his other claim to
fame was that he was somehow he and his
books were somehow the crucial catalyst
in this dissident movement that was
again from my perspective an absolute
failure an absolute disaster so end the
video by asking the question are there
any new ideas in politics in the 21st
century
extinction rebellion rose to the top of
the charts that got on the front page of
all the newspapers they briefly
disrupted life in London England and
they were passionately promising to you
they had a fundamentally new way to do
politics and if you look at the methods
of what they actually did and what they
attempted it's someone it's no more new
and no more exciting and no more
innovative than the list of 198th
methods in gene sharps garbage book
again within veganism within ecology
I've criticized all these things we have
I don't know one sort of bright-eyed
bushy-tailed foundation after another
that pops up and says we're not gonna be
like the charities in the best give us
your money we're gonna do something new
and innovative and profoundly different
like never before and therefore we're
gonna get results like never before and
very often I mean if we could just use
Socratic dialogue with these people if
any of these people would come on skype
and speak to me I would ask and I would
ask in a genuinely open-minded way what
are these new ideas what are these new
methods on what basis should donors
giving money to your foundation feel
confident that you are going to
accomplish something with it
fundamentally different from
fundamentally better than the
foundations that came before the street
protest movements that came before all I
see is the cynical recycling of the myth
of civil disobedience to get your money
out of your wallet and into their bank
account
[Music]